the name Mongo comes from “humongous”—with performance and easy data access as core design goals. 

NoSQL Databases:MongoDB 

Comparison of Mongo with MySQL 

the name Mongo comes from “humongous”—with performance and easy data access as core design goals. 

NoSQL Databases:MongoDB 

Comparison of Mongo with MySQL 

Aggregations 

Replication can be simply understood as the duplication of the data-set whereas sharding is partitioning the 
data-set into discrete parts.By sharding, we divided your collection into different parts. 

Replication and Sharding 

Replicating your database means you make imagers of your data-set. In terms of functionality delivered.  

Replication 

Replication is the method of duplication of data across multiple servers. For example, we have an application 
and it reads and writes data to a database and says this server A has a name and balance which will be 
copied/replicate to two other servers in two different locations. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Replication 

By doing this, will get 
redundancy and increases 
data availability with 
multiple copies of data on 
different database servers.  

So, it will increase the 
performance of reading 
scaling. The set of servers 
that maintain the same 
copy of data is known as 
replica servers or 
MongoDB instances 

 
Replication 

Sharding 

Sharding is a method for allocating data across multiple machines. MongoDB used sharding to help deployment 
with very big data sets and large throughput the operation. By sharding, you combine more devices to carry data 
extension and the needs of read and write operations. 

Why Sharding? 
• Database systems having big data sets or high throughput requests can doubt the ability of a single server. 
• For example, High query flows can drain the CPU limit of the server. 
• The working set sizes are larger than the system’s RAM to stress the I/O capacity of the disk drive. 

 
 
 
 
Sharding 

How does Sharding work? 
Sharding determines the problem with horizontal scaling breaking the system dataset and store over 
multiple servers, adding new servers to increase the volume as needed. 

Now, instead of one signal as primary, 
we have multiple servers called Shard. 
We have different routing servers that 
will route data to the shard servers. For 
example: Let say we have Data 1, Data 
2, and Data 3 this will be going to the 
routing server which will route the data 
(i.e, Different Data will go to a particular 
Shard ) Each Shard holds some pieces 
of data. Here the configuration server will 
hold the metadata and it will configure 
the routing server to integrate the 
particular data to a shard however 
configure server is the MongoDB 
instance if it goes down then the entire 
server will go down, So it again has 
Replica Configure database 

Sharding 

How does Sharding work? 
Sharding determines the problem with horizontal scaling breaking the system dataset and store over 
multiple servers, adding new servers to increase the volume as needed. 

Advantages of Sharding :  
• Sharding adds more server to a data field 
automatically adjust data loads across various 
servers. 
• The number of operations each shard manage 
got reduced. 
• It also increases the write capacity by splitting 
the write load over multiple instances. 
• It gives high availability due to the deployment 
of replica servers for shard and config. 
• Total capacity will get increased by adding 
multiple shards. 

GeoSpatial Queries 

MongoDB provides the functionality to store locations under the object type geoJSON and their coordinates 
against the coordinate field in [longitude, latitude] form where longitude must lie between [-180, 180] and latitude 
must lie between [-90,90], both inclusive. 

geoJSON types that are provided by MongoDB 

1. POINT: 
Represents a single location point, declared as below, 
{  
type: "Point",  
coordinates: [ 27, 67 ]  
} 

2. LINESTRING: 
The LineString coordinates field is an array of two or more points that represent a 
path in the real world. 
It is declared as- 
{  
type: "LineString",  
coordinates: [ [ 27, 67 ], [ 52, 4 ] ]  
} 

 
 
geoJSON types that are provided by MongoDB 

GeoSpatial Queries 

3. POLYGON: 
The Polygon coordinates field is an array of linear rings. Linear rings have at least four coordinates, 
and the first coordinate is the same as the last, making a loop.  

Polygon coordinates may contain a single linear ring or multiple rings. 

In the case of a single ring, polygon can be declared as, 

{  
type: "Polygon",  
coordinates: [[[2, 1], [3, 4], [5, 1], [2, 1]]]  
} 

 
 
 
geoJSON types that are provided by MongoDB 

GeoSpatial Queries 

geoJSON types that are provided by MongoDB 

GeoSpatial Queries 

GeoSpatial Queries 

