MODULE1: 
DATABASE  MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS  

Prepared  by, 
Dr ARUNA  M G 
AI&ML 

  
CONTENTS 

 Introduction to Databases:  Introduction, An Example, 

Characteristics of Database approach, Advantages of using 
DBMS approach, When not to use a DBMS   

 Database System Concepts and Architecture:  Data models, 

Schemas and instances, Three schema architecture and 
data independence Database languages and interfaces, The 
database system environment,  

 SQL: SQL Data Definition and Data Types specifying basic 
constraints in SQL, Basic retrieval queries in SQL, Insert, 
Delete and Update statements in SQL, Additional features 
of SQL, More complex SQL Queries, Specifying Constraints 
as Assertions and Triggers, Views (Virtual Tables) in SQL, 
Schema Change Statement in SQL.  

 
An example of data is a student’s 
test score 

Ex: The average score of a class is the 
information derived from the given data. 

WHAT IS DATA? 

 Data means recorded facts or Known facts that have 

implicit (unquestioned) meaning are stored on 
computer media. 

 Facts, figures, statistics etc. having no particular 

meaning.  

The Data can be: 
 Structured: numbers, text, dates 
 Unstructured: images, video, documents  
 Example :(USN,name.age) 
a) 1,Ramu, 19 
b) 23,Suma,20 

CONTINUED.. 

 Information: data processed to increase knowledge in the 

person using the data 

 Metadata / System catalog: data that describes the 

properties or characteristics of the data, including data 
types, field sizes, allowable values, and data context user 
data.  

 
WHAT IS DATABASE? 

  A database is a collection of related data or information, 

which stores data in form of table. 

 A Database: 

 collection of interrelated data + description of data  

information, which stores data in form of table.          Fields  Table Name: EMPLOYEE SSN Name Age Address Dno Salary 123467 Aruna 25 #45,Bangalore 5 20000 123469 Suri  26 #35,hassan 4 12000 123468 Mohan 27 #23,Bangalore 1 15000 123567 Jagadish 28 Null 5 20000   Table Name: DEPARTMENT Dname Dnumber Dlocation Research 5 Bangalore Administration 4 Bangalore Headquarters 1 Bombay                Fig :A database that stores employee and department information Records  
 
DEFINITIONS OF DATABASE 

 Def 1: Database is an organized collection of logically 

related data 

 Def 2: A database is a shared collection of logically 

related data that is stored to meet the requirements of 
different users of an organization 

 Def 3: A database is a self-describing collection of 

integrated records 

 Def 4: A database models a particular real world 

system in the computer in the form of data 

 
WHAT IS DB SYSTEM? 

 Database System 
 A database system is a software system, which 
supports the definition and use of a database  

 DDL: Data Definition Language 
 DML: Data Manipulation Language 

 
DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (DBMS)  

 A DBMS is a collection of interrelated files and set 
of programs that allow users to access and modify 
these files. 

 or 
 A DBMS is a collection of programs that enables 

the users to create & maintain a database.   

 DBMS is general-purpose software that facilitates 

the process of defining, constructing, 
manipulating and sharing database among various 
users and applications. 

 
 
DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (DBMS)  

A Database Management System (DBMS) is: 

 A software system designed to store, manage, and 

facilitate access to databases. 

 The primary goal of a DBMS is to provide a way to 

store and retrieve database information that is both 
convenient and efficient. 
 The DBMS Functionality 

 Defining a Database: It involves the specifying types of 
data types, structures and constraints of the data to 
be stored in the database. 

 Constructing a Database: The process of storing the 

database on a secondary storage medium . 

  
 
 
CONTINUE.. 

 Manipulating a Database: It includes functions for querying 
(retrieve specific data), updating, reporting, insertions, 
deletions and modifications to its content.  

 Concurrent processing and sharing by a set of users and 
programs – yet, keeping all data valid and consistent.  

 Other features: 
 Protecting the Database: It involves the two types of 

protection i.e. system protection against hardware/software 
(crashes) and security protection against unauthorized access.  

 Maintaining the Database: Maintain the database over long 

period of time. 

 Example’s: Access, Oracle, MySQLServer, dBase, Sybase, 

Clipper, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Apache Derby, SQLite , Ingres, 
etc. 

 
SIMPLIFIED DATABASE SYSTEM 
ENVIRONMENT 

DIFFERENT TYPES OF DBMS  

  Traditional  Database  applications : The information  stored 

and accessed  in computer  either  numeric  or textual  pattern ..    

  Multimedia  Databases:  Store  picture,  video  clips  and sound 

message. 

 Geographic  Information  Systems  (GIS) :  It can store  and 

analysis  maps,  weather  data and satellite  images.  

 Data Warehouses  and online  analytical  processing  (OLAP) : 

This is used  for decision  making  

 Real-time  and Active Databases:  It can be used  in controlling 

industrial  and manufacturing  processes.  

 Database  Search Technique:  Used  in World  Wide  Web (www) 

to improve  the search  for  information  that is needed  for 
browsing  in the internet . 

 Mobile databases 

 
 
 
DATABASE APPLICATIONS 

   

• Data can be stored in RAM 

– this is what every programming language 

offers! 

– RAM is fast, and random access 
– Isn’t this heaven? 

• Every OS includes a File System 
– manages files on a magnetic disk 
– allows open, read, seek, close on a file 
– allows protections to be set on a file 
– drawbacks relative to RAM? 

FILE PROCESSING SYSTEM VERSUS A 
DBMS 

 File processing system was the earliest storage type database 

system.  

 In file processing system the permanent records are stored in 

various files, and different application programs are written to 
extract records from, and to add records to appropriate files.  

 Each program defines and manages its own data . 

Program and Data Interdependence 

 
 
 
THE FILE SYSTEM HAS SOME DISADVANTAGE  

 Uncontrolled redundancy( The same data stored in multiple places ) 
 Inconsistent data(Incorrectness in data entry) 
 Inflexibility  
 Difficulty in accessing data  
 Data isolation 
 Integrity problems  
 Atomicity problems  
 Concurrent access anomalies  
 Security problem  
 Limited data sharing  
 Poor enforcement of standards  
 Low programmer productiv ity  
 Excessive program maintenance  
 Excessive data maintenance  

 
 
 
DUPLICATION OF DATA (DATA REDUNDANCY)  

 Same data is held by different programs. 
 Different systems/programs have separate copies 

of the same data 

 The different values and/or different formats for 

the same item. 

 Waste of space to have duplicate data 
 Causes more maintenance headaches 
 The biggest problem:  

When data changes in one file, could cause 

inconsistencies (Vulnerable to Inconsistency)  
Compromises data integrity (data reliability)  

 
 
INCONSISTENCY DATA 

 Incorrectness in data entry. 
Example: A changes made in customer address 
in savings-account records will be reflected 
but not in other files of banking system this 
makes the data inconsistency. 

  

CUSTOMER_SAVING Account_number Name Age Balance  Address 123467 Aruna 25 20000 #45,Bangalore 123469 Suri  26 12000 #35,hassan 123468 Mohan 27 15000 #23,Bangalore 123567 Jagadish 28 20000 #323,Bangalore 123467 Arun 25 20000 #45,Bangalore       Spelling Mistake in name field   CHECKING_ACCOUNT Account_number Name Address 123467 Aruna #45,Bangalore 123469 Suri  #35,hassan 123468 Mohan #23,Bangalore 123567 Jagadish Null  Changes not reflected  
CONTINUED.. 

 Inflexibility: If any necessary changes like adding a file or 
extend the data elements in an existing file the entire file 
has to be changed. This makes the affecting the stored 
data and the existing applications programs.   

 Example: 

 In student table need to add email id to existing DB.  

   

STUDENT 
USN 

123467 

123469 

Name 

Aruna 

Suri  

Age 

25 

26 

Address 

#45,Bangalore 

#35,hassan 

 
 
 
CONTINUED.. 

 Difficulty in accessing data: If requested query is not 

designed for original system. Then check the particular file 
to get the requested information manually or ask the 
system programmer to write the needed application 
program. 

 Example:  If bank officer’s needs to find out the names of 
all customers who live within a  particular postal-code 
area in a city’s.  

 There is no application program on hand to meet it in the 

original system. 

 The file-processing systems do not allow needed data to be 

retrieved in a convenient and efficient manner.  

 
CONTINUED.. 

 Data isolation: The data are scattered in various files, and 
files may be different formats, it is difficult to write new 
application programs to retrieve the appropriate data.   

  Integrity problems: The data values stored in the 
database must satisfy certain types of consistency 
constraints. 

 Example: The balance of a bank account may never fall 

below Rs.500. Developers enforce these constraints in the 
system by adding code in the various application programs. 
If new constraints wanted to add, it is difficult to change 
the programs.    

   

 
 
CONTINUED.. 

 Atomicity problems: If any mechanical or electrical types 
of failure occur to the system, the data should be restored 
to the consistent state. Atomic means it must happen 
entirely or not at all. 

 Example: If J wants to transfer Rs2000 from his account to 

S. If a system failure occur during execution of the 
program, that Rs2000 is removed from J but not credited to 
account S, resulting in an inconsistent state. To stay in 
consistent state either both credit and debit occur, or that 
neither occur. 

   

CUSTOMER_SAVING Account_number Name Age Balance  Address 123469 Suri  26 12000 #35,hassan 123468 Mohan 27 15000 #23,Bangalore 123567 Jagadish 28 18000 #323,Bangalore Figure1.4 Atomicity problems   inconsistent state   
CONTINUED.. 

 Concurrent  access anomalies :  System  allows  multiple  users  to 

update,  delete  and retrieve  the data  simultaneously.   

 If two programs  run concurrently,  they may both  read  the value, 
and write back  the value.  Depending  on which one  writes  the 
value  last,  that value  maybe  correct  or incorrect  value.  

 Example:   If two customers  withdraw  amount  from  J (say Rs200 

and Rs300  respectively)  at the same  time, the result  of 
concurrent  executions  may leave  the account  in an incorrect 
state. 

 Security  problem:  Not every  user  of the database  system  should 

be able  to access  all the data.  

 Example:  In a student  database  system,  updating  marks  is allowed 
only for lecturer,  only viewing  the data for student  and restricted 
for updating  the data. 

 
 
 
PROGRAM-DATA DEPENDENCE 

 Each application programmer must maintain their 

own data/program code 

 Each application program needs to include code 

for the metadata of each file 

 Each application program must have its own 

processing routines for reading, inserting, updating 
and deleting data 

 Lack of coordination and central control 
 Non-standard file formats 

 
 
CONTINUED.. 

 Limited Data Sharing 
 No centralized control of data 
 Programs are written in different languages, and so cannot easily 

access each other’s files. 

 Lengthy Development Times 

 Programmers must design their own file formats  

 Excessive Program Maintenance 

 80% of of information systems budget 
 Vulnerable to Inconsistency 

 Change in one table need changes in corresponding tables as well 

otherwise data will be inconsistent  

 
 
MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DATABASE 
APPROACH VERSUS THE FILE PROCESSING  

1. Self-describing nature of a database 

2.

system 
Insulation between programs and data, 
and data abstraction 

3. Support of multiple views of the data 
4. Sharing of data and multiuser transaction 

processing 

 
 
CONTINUE.. 

 Self-describing nature of a database system:  

 A DBMS catalog stores the description of a particular 

database (e.g. data structures, types, and constraints)  

 The description is called meta-data. 
 This allows the DBMS software to work with different 

database applications. 

 Insulation between programs and data:  

 Called program-data independence. 
 Allows changing data structures and storage 

organization without having to change the DBMS access 
programs. 

 
An example of a database catalog for the 
database in figure (a) 

Example: To add a new field Birthdate to Employee records, we only need to 
change the description of Employee records in the catalog; no change in the 
programs. 

internal storage for EMPLOYEE record, based on the database catalog 
in Figure (a) 

RELATIONS  Relation_name No_of_columns EMPLOYEE 5 DEPARTMENT 3 PROJECT 3 DEPENDENT 4    (a) COLUMNS Column_name Data_type Belongs_to_relaiton SSN Character(10) EMPLOYEE Name Character(10) EMPLOYEE Age Integer EMPLOYEE Address Character(30) EMPLOYEE Salary Decimal(10,2) EMPLOYEE Dname Character(10) DEPARTMENT Dnumber Character(10) DEPARTMENT Dlocation Character(30) DEPARTMENT Pname Character(10) PROJECT ….. …….. ….. …… …….. …….     (b) Data Item Name Starting Position in Record Length in characters (bytes) SSN 1 10 Name 11 10 Age 21 1 Address 22 30 Salary 52 10,2  PROGRAM-OPERATION INDEPENDENCE 

 In object-oriented  and  object-relational  systems,  users  can 

define  operations  on data as part of the database  definitions.  

   
 An operation  (also  called a function  or method)  is specified 

in two parts.   
 The interface  (or signature)  of an operation  includes  the 
operation  name  and the data types  of its arguments  (or 
parameters). 

 The implementation  (or method)  of the operation  is 

specified  separately  and can be changed  without affecting 
the interface . 

 User  application  programs  can operate  on the data by 

invoking  these  operations  through  their  names  and arguments, 
regardless  of how the operations  are implemented. This may 
be termed  program-operation  independence 

DATA ABSTRACTION 

 The characteristic that allows  program-data  independence 
is  called  data 

independence 

and  program-operation 
abstraction. 

 A  data  model  is  used  to  hide  storage  and  implementation 
details  and  also  present  the  users  with  a  conceptual  view 
of the database. 

 
 
SUPPORT OF MULTIPLE VIEWS OF THE 
DATA  

 Each user may see a different view of the 

database, which describes only the data of interest 
to that user. 

Example: One user is interested in accessing and printing the specified employee 
field details. A second user, who is interested in checking salary details of 
employee who work in department 5.  

(a)  EMPLOYEE  SSN Name 123467 Aruna 123469 Sita 123468 Sai 123567 Babu  (b)EMPLOYEE  SSN Name Dno 123467 Aruna 5 123567 Babu 5   
 
SHARING OF DATA AND MULTIUSER 
TRANSACTION PROCESSING:  

 It allows multiple users to retrieve and to update the 

database at the same time. 

 Concurrency control within the DBMS guarantees that each 
transaction is correctly executed or completely aborted .  

 OLTP (Online Transaction Processing) is a major part of 

database applications This allows hundreds of concurrent 
transactions to execute per second.  

 Example: Any online booking DB system 
 when multiuser accesses the information about the seat 

details of the flight and reserve a seat on an airline 
reservation database system ensure that each seat can be 
accessed by only one user at a time. The DBMS software 
ensures that concurrent transactions operate correctly and 
efficiently. 

 
 
THE CONCEPT OF A SHARED 
ORGANIZATIONAL DATABASE 

Management 

Marketing 

Planning 

Control 

Sales 

Product 
 Development 

Corporate 
Database 

Accounting 

Manufacturing 

Accounts 
 Receivable 

Accounts 
Payable 

Scheduling 

Production 

ADVANTAGES OF USING THE DATABASE 
APPROACH 

 Controlling redundancy in data storage and in 

development and maintenance efforts. 

 Sharing of data among multiple users. 
 Restricting unauthorized access to data. 
 Providing persistent storage for program Objects 
In Object-oriented DBMSs  
Example: ”Programming languages like Pascal, java or C++ 
the values of program variables are discarded/lost  once a 
program terminates, till  programmer explicitly stores them in 
permanent files. 
 Providing Storage Structures (e.g. indexes) for 

efficient Query Processing 

 
CONTINUED.. 

 Providing backup and recovery services. 
 Providing multiple interfaces to different classes 

of users. 

 Representing complex relationships among data. 
 Enforcing integrity constraints on the database. 
 Drawing inferences and actions from the stored 

data using deductive and active rules 

 
ADDITIONAL IMPLICATIONS OF USING 
THE DATABASE APPROACH 

 Potential for enforcing standards: 

 This is very crucial for the success of database 

applications in large organizations. 

 The database permits the DBA to define and enforce 

standards among database users. 

  Standards refer to data item names, display formats, 
screens, report structures, meta-data (description of 
data), Web page layouts, etc. 

 Reduced application development time: 

 Once a database is up and running, substantially less 
time is generally required to create new applications 
using DBMS facilities. 

 Incremental time to add each new application is 

reduced. 

 
CONTINUED.. 

 Flexibility to change data structures: 

 Database structure can be changed as per the requirements 
change without affecting the stored data and the existing 
application programs. 

 Availability of current/ Up-to-Date Information: 

 Extremely important for on-line transaction systems such as 

airline, hotel, car reservations. 

 As soon as one user’s update is applied to the database, all 

other users can immediately see this update. 

 Economies of scale: 

 Makes the organization profitable by combining many 

application & data.  

 Wasteful overlap of resources and personnel can be 

avoided by consolidating data and applications across 
departments 

 
WHEN NOT TO USE A DBMS 

 Main inhibitors (costs) of using a DBMS: 

 High initial investment and possible need for additional 

hardware. 

 Overhead for providing generality, security, concurrency 

control, recovery, and  integrity functions. 

 When a DBMS may be unnecessary: 

 If the database and applications are simple, well defined, 

and not expected to change. 

 If there are stringent real-time requirements that may not be 

met because of DBMS overhead. 

 If access to data by multiple users is not required. 

 
CONTINUED.. 

 When no DBMS may suffice: 

 If the database system is not able to handle the 

complexity of data because of modeling limitations 
 If the database users need special operations not 

supported by the DBMS. 

 
LIMITATIONS OF DBMS 

Complexity 
Size 
Cost 

 Software 
 Hardware 
 Conversion 

Performance 
Vulnerability 

 
DEFINE MODEL, DATA MODEL AND SCHEME  

Model 

 A model is described by the schema which is held in the data  dictionary. 
 A structure that demonstrates all the required features of the parts of the 

real world which is of interest to the users of the information in the model.  

 Representation and reflection of the real world (Universe of Discourse ) 

Data Model 
 A data model  is a collection of concepts for describing data . 
 It describe structure of a database: the data types, relationships, 

constraints, semantics and operational behavior. 
 It is a tool for data abstraction 

Database Schema:  
The description of a database is called database schema, which is 
specified during database design and is not expected to change 
frequently. 

   

 
 
 
 
UNIVERSITY DB 

A schema is a description of a particular collection of data, using a 
given data model. 

 Schema:                     

 Students(sid text,  
         name text,  
         login text,  
         age integer,  
         gpa float) 

  Courses(cid text, 
         cname text,  
         credits integer)  

  Enrolled(sid text, 

          cid text,  
          grade text) 

Student(studno,name,address) Course(courseno,lecturer)                                                                                                                 Schema                                                                                       Student(123,Bloggs,Woolton)  Course(321,Jones,Owens)                       Instance   Student(studno,name,address) Course(courseno,lecturer)                                                                                                                 Schema                                                                                       Student(123,Bloggs,Woolton)  Course(321,Jones,Owens)                       Instance   
 
 
DEFINE THE TERM 

 Database  state :   T h e  d a t a  i n  t h e  d a t a b a s e  a t  a   p a r t i c u l a r  m o m e n t  i n  t i m e  i s  

c a l l e d a   d a t a b a s e .  

 state  or  snapshot .     I t  i s  a l s o  c a l l e d t h e   c u r r en t  s e t  o f  o c c ur r en c es  o r  

i n s t a n c es  i n  t h e  d a t a b a s e .  

 Empty  state :   T h e  d a t a b a se  w i t h  n o  d a t a  i s  c a l l e d e m p t y  s t a t e .  

 Initial  state :   w h e n  t h e  d a t a b a s e  i s  f i r s t  p o p u l a t e d o r  l o a d e d w i t h  t h e  i n i t i a l  

d a t a .  

 Curren t  state :  A t  a n y  p o i n t i n  t i m e ,  t h e  d a t a b a s e  h a s  a   c u r r e n t  s t a t e .  

 Valid  state :  A s t a t e  t h a t  s a t i s f i e s t h e  s t r u c tu r e  a n d  c o n st r a i n ts  s p e c i fi e d i n  

t h e  s c h e m a .  

 Invalid  state :   I f  a   s t a t e  t h a t  d o  n o t  s a t i s f i e s t h e  s t r u c t u r e  a n d  c o n st r a i n ts 

s p e c i fi e d  i n  t h e  s c h e m a .  

 The schema is sometimes called the  intension, and a database 

state is called an  extension of the schema.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEME DIAGRAM 

Schema Diagram: A displayed schema is called a Schema 
diagram 

Example:  FLIGHT-SCHEDULE FLIGHT# AIRLINE WEEKDAY PRICE   DEPT-AIRPORT FLIGHT# AIRPORT-CODE     Figure1.16: Schema diagram EXAMPLE 

PROGRAM 1: INSURANCE DATABASE 

Consider the Insurance database given below.  
The primary keys are underlined and the data types are specified.  
PERSON (driver-id #: String, name: String, address: String)  
CAR (Regno: String, model: String, year: int)  
ACCIDENT (report-number: int, date: date, location: String)  
OWNS (driver-id #: String, Regno: String)  
PARTICIPATED (driver-id: String, Regno: String, report-number: 
int, damage-amount: int) 

 
DATA MODELS IN DBMS 

 A Data Model in Database Management System (DBMS)   is 

the concept of tools that are developed to summarize the 
description of the database.  Data Models provide us with a 
transparent picture of data which helps us in creating an 
actual database. It shows us from the design of the data to 
its proper implementation of data . 

 Types of Relational Models 
1. Conceptual Data Model 
2. Representational Data Model  
3. Physical Data Model 

 
 
CATEGORIES OF DATA MODELS 

 High-level or Conceptual data models :  
 It used to describes the structure of the database (based 

on entities, attributes and relationships ). 

 Entity: It represents a real world object such as an 

employee or a project. 

 Attributes: It represents some property of interest that 

describes an entity, such as the employee’s name or salary.  

 Relationship: A relationship among the two or more 

entities represents an association among two or more 
entities. 

 Example: a work-on relationship between an employee and 

a project 

 
CONTINUED.. 

 A low-level or physical data model: It used to 

describes the details of how data is stored in the 
computer.  These concepts generally meant for 
computer specialists, not for typical end users . 

 Representational or implementation data models: 

It is between the high level or low level data 
models, which provides concepts that is understood 
by end user and also the way data is organized by 
within the computer. 

  It hides some details of data storage but can be 

implemented on a computer system directly 
(record-based, object oriented).  

 
 
SOME OTHER DATA MODELS 

Relational Model 
Network Model 
Hierarchical Model 
Object Oriented Model 
Semantic Data Model 

 
 
RELATIONAL MODEL 

 Relational model was originally introduced in 1970, was 

heavily researched and experimented within IBM Research 
and several universities. 

 Relational DBMS Products emerged in the early 1980s. 
 It uses a collection of tables to represent both data and the 

relationship among those data.  Each table has multiple 
columns and each column has unique name . 

 Commercial systems include: ORACLE, DB2, SYBASE, INFORMIX, 

INGRES, SQL Server 

 Relational Model - Data Structures 
 domains 
 attributes 
 relations 

Relation name  flight-schedule flight#:integer  airline:char(20)  weekday:char(2)  price:dec(6,2)  Attribute names domain names   
 
CONTINUED.. 

ADVANTAGES: 
 Data represent in a Simplified format.  
 Manipulating record is simple with the use of key 

attributes. 

 Representation of different types of relationship is possible 

with this model. 

Operations 
  Powerful set-oriented query languages 
 Relational Algebra: procedural; describes how to compute a 

query; operators like JOIN, SELECT, PROJECT  

 Relational Calculus: declarative; describes the desired 

result, e.g. SQL, QBE 

 Insert, delete, and update capabilities  

HIERARCHICAL MODEL 

 It is the type of database that stores data in the form of 

parent-children relationship nodes. Here, it organizes data 
in a tree-like structure. It used to create a relationship 
b/n two units(1:N).  

 Commercial systems include IBM’s IMS, MRI’s System -2000 

(now sold by SAS), and CDC’s MARS IV. 

 
 
NETWORK MODEL 

 The collections of records, and relationships, among data are 

represented by links.  Which can viewed as pointers.  

 Or  
 The network model allows any unit to be related to other unit 

through fixed relationship(M:N).  

 Based on the CODASYL-DBTG 1971 report. Commercial systems 

include, CA-IDMS and DMS-1100 

  
 
 
OBJECT-ORIENTED DATA MODEL 

 The data  and their relationships  are contained  in a single 

structure. 

 In this,  real-world  problems  are represented  as objects  with 

different  attributes.   

 All objects  have  multiple  relationships  between  them.  It is a 

combination  of Object  Oriented  programming  and  a Relational 
Database  Model. 

 e.g.,  Simula,  Smalltalk,  C++, Java  

Example:   
class  flight-schedule  { 
type  tuple  (flight#:  integer, 
  weekdays:  set ( weekday:  enumeration  { mo,tu,we,th,fr,sa,su}) 
   dept-airport:  airport,  arriv-airport:  airport) 
       method  reschedule(new-dept:  airport,  new-arriv:  airport)} 

 
 
 
• Data on the Web and E-commerce Applications 

 Scientific Applications 
 XML (eXtensible Markup Language) 
 Image Storage and Management 
 Audio and Video Data Management 
 Data Warehousing and Data Mining 
 Spatial Data Management 
 Time Series and Historical Data Management 

https://www.javatpoint.com/types-of-databases 

 
Three schema Architecture: 
•It is also called ANSI/SPARC architecture or three-level architecture. 
•The  framework  is  used  to  describe  the  structure  of  a  specific  database 
system. 
•It used to separate the user applications and physical database. 
•The  three  schema  architecture  contains  three-levels.  It  breaks  the 
database down into three different categories. 

 
 
 
INTERNAL LEVEL HAS AND INTERNAL 
SCHEMA 

 It describes the physical storage structure of the database . 
  Uses a physical data model and describes the complete details of 

data storage and access path for the database.  

 The internal schema is also known as a physical schema . 
 Storage space allocations.  

For Example: B-Trees, Hashing etc.  

 Access paths.  

For Example: Specification of primary and secondary keys, indexes, 
pointers and sequencing.  

 Data compression and encryption techniques.  
 Optimization of internal structures.  
 Representation of stored fields.  

 
 
CONCEPTUAL LEVEL HAS A CONCEPTUAL 
SCHEMA  

 It describes the structure of the whole database for a 

community of users.  

 Conceptual level is also known as logical level. 
 Hides the details of physical storage structures and 
concentrates on describing entities, data types, 
relationships, user operations, and constraints . 

 Programmers and database administrators work at this level.  

 
 
EXTERNAL OR VIEW LEVEL  

 An external schema/level is also known as view schema. 
 It includes a number of external schemas or user views.    
 At the external level, a database contains several schemas 

that sometimes called as subschema . 

 The subschema is used to describe the different view of the 

database. 

 It describes the part of the database that a particular user 

group is interested in and hides the rest of the database from 
that user group. 

 . 

 
 
MAPPING BETWEEN VIEWS 

• The  three  levels  of  DBMS  architecture  don't  exist 

independently of each other. 
is  used 

• Mapping 

to 

transform 

the 

various  database 

request  and 
levels  of 

response  between 
architecture. 

• DBMS  is  responsible  for  correspondence  between  the 
three  types  of  schema.  This  correspondence  is  called 
Mapping. 

 
 
EXAMPLE: 

MAPPING BETWEEN VIEWS 

There are basically two types of mapping in the 
database architecture: 
 Conceptual/ Internal Mapping 
 External / Conceptual Mapping 
• In External / Conceptual mapping, it is necessary to 
to 

from  external 

request 

level 

transform 
conceptual schema. 

the 

• In  Conceptual  /  Internal  mapping,  DBMS  transform 
the request from the conceptual to internal level. 

 
 
MAPPING BETWEEN VIEWS 

• The 

three 

levels  of  DBMS  architecture  don't  exist 

independently of each other. 

• Mapping  is  used  to  transform  the  request  and  response 

between various database levels of architecture. 

• DBMS  is  responsible  for  correspondence  between  the  three 
types of schema. This correspondence is called Mapping. 
is  necessary 

to 
transform  the  request  from  external  level  to  conceptual 
schema. 

/  Conceptual  mapping, 

• In  External 

it 

• In  Conceptual  /  Internal  mapping,  DBMS  transform  the 

request from the conceptual to internal level. 

 
 
DATA INDEPENDENCE 

 The capacity to change the schema at one level of 

a DB system without change the schema at the 
next higher level is called data independence. 

   Two types of data independence: 
1. Logical data independence :  Change the 
conceptual schema without having to change the 
external schemas 

2. Physical data independence: Change the 
internal schema without having to change the 
conceptual schema 

 
 
 
DATABASE LANGUAGES AND INTERFACES  

• A  DBMS  has  appropriate 

languages  and 

interfaces 

to 

express database queries and updates. 

• Database  languages  can  be  used  to  read,  store  and  update 

the data in the database. 

 
 
DBMS LANGUAGES  

 Structured Query Language(SQL) 
 DBMS packages provide an integrated feature of above 

languages into a single language called Structured Query 
Language.  

 Data definition language (DDL), is used by the DBA and by 

database designers to define both schemas.  

 Storage definition language (SDL), is used to specify the 

internal schema.  

 View definition language (VDL), to specify user views and 

their mappings to the conceptual schema.   

 Data manipulation language(DML) provides set of 
operations like retrieval, insertion, deletion, and 
modification of the data.  

 
DML 

 There are two main types of DMLs. They are   
 High-level or nonprocedural DML  
 Low-level or procedural DML 

 High-level DML: Many DBMSs allow high-level DML statements 
either to be entered interactively from a display monitor or 
terminal or to be embedded in a general -purpose programming 
language. 

  Retrieve many records in a single DML statement; therefore, 

they are called set-at-a-time or set-oriented DML’s.   
 A query in a high-level DML often specifies which data to 
retrieve rather than how to retrieve it; therefore, such 
languages are also called declarative. 

 
 
DML 

 Low-level or procedural DML: They must be embedded in a 

general-purpose programming language.  

  The low-level are also called record-at-a-time because it 

retrieve only one record or objects at a time from the DB and 
processes each separately.  

 It use programming language such as lopping, to retrieve and 

process each record from a set of records.  

 Ex: Hierarchical model is DL/1 uses command like GET 

UNIQUE, GET NEXT, GET NEXT WITHIN PARENT etc  

  Whenever DML commands, whether high level or low level, are 

embedded in general-purpose programming language , that 
language is called the host language and the DML  is called 
data sublanguage.  High-level DML used in a standalone 
interactive manner is called a query language. 

 
INTERFACES IN DBMS 

1. Menu-Based Interfaces for Web Clients or Browsing.  

2. Forms-Based Interfaces displays a form to each user  

3. Graphical User Interfaces displays a schema to the user in 

diagrammatic form  

4. Natural Language Interfaces accepts requests written in English or 

some other language and attempt to understand them.   

5. Speech Input and Output Interfaces  
6. Interfaces for Parametric  Users  such as bank tellers, often have a 

small set of operations that they must perform repeatedly.   

7. Interfaces for the Database Administrator (DBA)   use privileged 

commands  

 
 
 
 
 
DATABASE USERS 

DB USERS 

DB USERS 

Users  are  differentiated  by  the  way  they  expect  to  interact 

with the system 

 System Analysts – Determine the requirements of end users 

 Database  Designers  –  Identify  and  Choose  appropriate 

structures to represent and store data 

 Application  Programmers  –  interact  with  system  through 

DML calls 

 
END USERS 

 Casual Users 

 uses a  sophisticated database query  language  to specify their requests 

and are typically middle or high level managers 

 Sophisticated Users 

 form requests in a database query language. Scientists/Engineers 

 Specialized Users  

 write  specialized  database  applications  that  do  not  fit  into  the 

traditional  data processing framework 

 Naïve or Parametric Users  

 invoke  one  of  the  permanent  application  programs  that  have  been 
written  previously.  Example:  people  accessing  database  over  the  web, 
bank tellers, clerical staff 

 Standalone  Users  

 who  maintain  personal  databases  by  using  ready  made  program 

packages that provide  easy to use menu or GUI based interfaces 

 
DATABASE ADMINISTRATOR (DBA) 

 Coordinates all the activities of the database system 

 has  good  understanding  of  the  enterprise’s  information  resources 

and needs. 

 Responsible for Managing the resources  

 Database (primary) 
 DBMS (secondary) 
 DBA's duties include: 

 Storage structure and access method definition 
 Schema and physical organization modification 
 Granting users authority to access the database 
 Backing up data 
 Monitoring 

performance 

responding 

and 

requirements 
 Database tuning 

to 

changes 

in 

 
THE DATABASE SYSTEM ENVIRONMENT:  
DBMS COMPONENT MODULES 

The figure is divided into two halves.  
• The top half of the figure refers to the various users of the database 

environment and their interfaces.  

• The lower half shows the internals of the DBMS responsible for storage of 

data and processing of transaction.  

1. Database System Environment 
    a. DBMS Component Modules 
    b. Database System Utilities 
        • Loading 
        • Backup 
        • File Reorganization 
        • Performance Monitoring 
    c. Other Tools 
        • CASE tools 
        • Data Dictionary System 
        • Application Development Environment 
        • Communications Software 

CONTINUED.. 

 The DBA staff  works on defining  the database  and tuning  it by 

making  changes  to its definition  using  the DDL and other 
privileged  commands. 

 DDL compiler  processes  schema  definitions,  specified  in the 

DDL, and stores  descriptions  of the schemas  (meta -data)  in the 
DBMS catalog. 

 Catalog  includes  information  such  as the names  and sizes  of 
files,  names  and data types  of data  items,  storage  details  of 
each  file, mapping  information  among  schemas,  and constraints, 
in addition  to many other  types  of information  that are needed 
by the DBMS  modules 

 Casual  users and persons  with occasional  need  for information 

from  the database  interact  using  some  form  of interface, 
interactive  query  interface .   These  queries  are parsed, 
analyzed  for correctness  of the operations  for the model,  the 
name  of data elements,  and so on by a  query  compiler  that 
compiles  them  into an internal  form.     

 
 
 
CONTINUED.. 

 Query optimizer is concerned with rearrangement and 

possible reordering of operations, elimination of 
redundancies, and use of correct algorithms and indexes 
during execution.  It consults the system catalog for 
statistical and other physical information about the stored 
data and generates executable code that performs the 
necessary operations for the query and makes calls on the 
runtime processor. 

 Precompiler extracts DML commands from an application 
program written in a host programming language.  These 
commands are sent to the DML compiler for compilation into 
object code for database access. The rest of the 
programming is sent to the host language compiler.  

 
 
CONTINUED.. 

 In lower half of the figure the runtime database processor is 

shown to execute  

1. The privileged commands,    
2. The executable query plans, and     
3. The canned transactions with runtime parameters.   
 It works with the system dictionary and may update it with 
statistics.  
It works with the stored data manager, for carrying out low -
level input/output operations between disk and memory, 
management of buffers in main memory.  
Concurrency control and backup and recovery systems 
separately as module for transaction management.  

 
DATABASE SYSTEM UTILITIES  

 Common  utilities  have the following  types of functions:  
1. Loading  – is used  to load existing  data files  into the 

database,  transferring  data from  one DBMS to another, 
loading  programs  are called  conversion  tools. 

2. Backup  – dumping  the entire  database  onto tape,  this 

backup  can be used  to restore  the database.   

3. Database  storage  reorganization  – reorganize  a set of 

database  files  into a different  file organization  to improve 
performance. 

4. Performance  monitoring  – monitors  database  usage  and 

provides  information   to the DBA  

5. Other  utilities  for sorting  files,  handling  data  compression, 

monitoring  access  by users,  interfacing  with the network, 
and performing  other  functions  

 
TOOLS, APPLICATION ENVIRONMENTS, AND 
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 

 CASE tools used in design phase of database systems.  
 Data dictionary / data repository is used to store catalog.  
 (Stored information like schema descriptions and other 

information such as design decisions, application program 
descriptions, user information, usage standards, etc. Such 
system called information repository.) 

 Active data dictionary is accessed by DBMS software and 

users/DBA, 

 Passive data dictionary is accessed by users/DBA only. 
 Application development env ironment systems provide an 

environment for developing database applications. 

.Ex: Jbuilder, PowerBuilder system 
 (It used for database design, GUI development, querying and 

updating, and application program development) 

 
CONITNUED.. 

 Communications software, allow users to remote access 

database. 

  These are connected to the database site through data 

communications hardware such as Internet routers, phone 
lines, long-haul networks, local networks, or satellite 
communication devices  

 The integrated DBMS and data communications system is 

called a DB/DC system  

 
