DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Unit -2 

Data Modeling using the Entity-Relationship(ER) model:  

Using  High-Level  Conceptual  Data  Models  for  Database  Design,  A  sample 

Database Application, Entity types, Entity Sets, Attributes, and Keys, Relationship 

Types,  Relationship  Sets,  Roles  and  Structural  Constraints,  Weak  Entity  types, 

Refining  the  ER  Design,  ER  Diagrams,  Naming  Conventions  and  Design  Issues, 

Relationship Types of Degree Higher than two, Relational Database Design using 

ER-to-Relational Mapping. 

Text Book: 

1.  Database 

systems  Models,  Languages,  Design  and  Application 

Programming,  RamezElmasri  and  Shamkant  B.  Navathe,  7th  Edition,  2017, 

Pearson. 

2.  Database  management  systems,  Ramakrishnan,  and  Gehrke,  3rd  Edition, 

2014, McGraw Hill 

Prepared by, 
Dr.Aruna M G 
Associate Professor 
Department of AI & ML 
DSCE 
Bangalore 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Entity-Relationship Model 

Using High-Level Conceptual Data Models for Database Design or Database Design Process 

    Mini world 

Requirements Collection & 
Analysis 

Functional Requirements             Data Requirements 

Functional Analysis 

Conceptual Design 

High- level transaction 
Specification 
(Ex:-User Defined Operations, 
 Data Flow Diagrams, 
Sequence 
 Diagrams, Scenarios) 

Application Program 
Design 

Conceptual Schema (in a high level data 
model) 
Entity Types, Constraints, Relationships 
No Implementation Details. 

DBMS -Independent 

DBMS -Specific 

Implementation Details 

Logical 
Design 

Logical (conceptual) schema (in the Data Model 
Mapping of a specific DBMS – Type of Database is 
identified) 

Physical 
Design 

Transaction 
implementation 

(Internal Storage Structures / Access Path / File 
Organizations) 
        Internal schema 

Application programs 

Figure2.1 A simplified diagram of database design phases 

Figure shows a simplified description of the Database design process using high level conceptual 
Data Model 

The first phase is requirement collection and analysis. During this step, the DB designer is 
responsible of DB users to understand and document their data requirement. The result of 
this  is  written  in  set  of  users  requirements.  The  requirement  should  be  specified  in 
detailed and complete a form as possible. 

In parallel with requirement, it is also necessary to specify functional requirements of the 
application. These consist the user-defined operation (transaction) that will apply to DB; 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

they  include  both  retrievals  and  updates.  Functional  requirement  is  specified  by  using 
data flow diagrams, sequence diagrams, scenarios and other techniques. 

Once all the requirement have been collected and analyzed. 
The  next  step  is  to  create  a  conceptual  schema  for  the  DB,  using  a  high-level  conceptual 
data  model.  This  step  is  called  conceptual  DB  design.  This  schema  will  describe  the 
structures of the whole DB for community of users. It hides the details of physical storage 
structures and includes detailed descriptions of data types, relationships and constraints; 
these  are  expressed  using  the  concepts  provided  by  the  high-level  data  model.  These 
concepts do not include implementation details; they are easier to understand and can be 
used to communicate with nontechnical users.  

High level  conceptual schema is used as a reference, to  ensure all user‟s data requirements 
are  met  and  that  the  requirements  do  not  conflicts.  This  provides  the  DB  designer  to 
concentrate  on  specifying  the  properties  of  the  data  without  concerning  with  storage 
details.       

After the conceptual schema has been designed, the basic data model operation can be used 

to specify high level user operations identified during functional analysis. 

The next step in DB design is actual implementation of the DB, using a commercial DBMS. 
Conceptual  schema  is  transformed  from  the  high  level  data  model  into  the  implementation 

data model. This step is called logical DB design or data model mapping. 

The last step is the physical DB design phase, during which the internal storage structures, 

indexes, access paths, and file organization for the Db are specified. 

In parallel with these activities, application programs are designed and implemented as DB 

transactions corresponding to the high level transaction specifications. 

An example Database Application: 

  Requirements of the Company (oversimplified for illustrative purposes) 

–The company is organized into DEPARTMENTs. Each department has a unique name, unique 
number  and  an  employee  who  manages  the  department.  To  keep  track  of  the  start  date  of  the 
employee began to managing department. A department may have several locations. 
–Each  department  controls  a  number  of  PROJECTs.  Each  project  has  a  unique  name,  unique 
number and is located at a single location. 
–To  store each EMPLOYEE‟s social security number, address, salary, sex, and birthdate. Each 
employee  works  for  one  department  but  may  work  on  several  projects.  We  keep  track  of  the 
number of hours per week that an employee currently works on each project. We also keep track 
of the direct supervisor of each employee. 
–Each  employee  may  have  a  number  of  DEPENDENTs.  For  each  dependent,  to  keep  track  of 
their name, sex, birth date, and relationship to employee. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 3 

 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Figure2.2 An ER schema diagram for the COMPANY database 

Relation  
A relational database is made up of a collection of tables or relation. 

Common terms  
Database 
Table   
Column 
 Row 

            DBMS   
Table   
Table   
Field 
record   

RDBMS 
Database 
Relation 
Attribute 
tuple 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Tuples  

Relation 

EMPLOYEE 

SSN 
123467 
123469 
123468 
123567 

Name 
Aruna 
Thunga 
Nimi 
Sur 

Figure2.3Employee Relation 

    Attributes 

Age 
25 
26 
27 
28 

Address 
#45,Bangalore 
#35,hassan 
#23,Bangalore 
Null 

Salary 
20000 
12000 
15000 
20000 

ER Model (Entity Relationship Model) 
The ER model describes data as entities, relationships, and attributes. 

Entities  
–Entities are specific objects or things in the mini-world that are represented in the database.  
Or  
- An entity is a real world object with a physical existence. 
Example: a particular person, car, house, Employee etc. 
Represented in ER diagram by rectangle  

EMPLOYEE 

Attributes 
Attributes are particular properties or characteristics used to describe an entity. 
For example an EMPLOYEE entity may have a Name, SSN, Address, Sex, BirthDate etc. 
–Each attribute has  a value set (or data type) associated with it  – e.g. integer, string, subrange, 
enumerated type, 
Represented in ER diagram by oval 

Eno# 

Ename  

Age 

EMPLOYEE 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Attribute Type: 
It is the property of entity type instance is called attribute type 

Attribute Instance: 
It is the property of entity instance is called attribute instance. 

–A specific entity will have a value for each of its attributes 
For  example  a  specific  employee  entity  may  have  Name='John  Smith',  SSN='123456789', 
Address ='731, Fondren, Houston, TX', Sex='M', BirthDate='09-JAN-55„ 

Types of Attributes  

1.Simple Vs composite attribute 

Simple or Atomic Attribute 
–Each entity has a single atomic value for the attribute i.e means the attribute cannot be divided 
into simpler components further.  
Or 
 The attribute that is not divisible into subparts. 

For example: SSN, Sex, Age of an employee 

SSN 

Age 

EMPLOYEE 

Composite 
–The  attribute  may  be  composed  of  several  components  which  mean  attribute  can  be  further 
divided into smaller subparts.  
Or 
The attribute that can be divided into smaller subparts. 

  Composite attribute is denoted by parenthesis ( )  

For example: Address (Apt#, House#, Street, City, State, ZipCode, Country) , 
Name (FirstName, MiddleName, LastName) 
Date of joining of the employee. 
» Can be split into day, month and year 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

2.Single Vs Multi-valued Attributes 

Multi-valued 
An entity may have multiple values for that attribute.  

  Multi valued attribute is denoted by flower braces { } and ER diagram by double oval. 
For  example,  Color  of  a  CAR  or  PreviousDegrees  of  a  STUDENT.  Denoted  as  {Color}  or 
{PreviousDegrees}. 

Single-valued 
An entity has a single value for the attribute.  
For example, Age , SSN, Sex 

SSN 

Age 

EMPLOYEE 

3 Stored Vs Derived attribute 
Stored  
The attribute values cannot be derived from related entities. Or The Attribute cannot be derived 
from any other attribute. 
Example:  Birth date, Date of joining attribute of employee. 

Derived  
Attribute that can be calculated based on other attributes. 
 Example: years of service of employee can be calculated from date of joining and current date. 
Or 
The attribute values can be derived from related entities. 
Example: Age attribute.  If we know the birthdate it is easy to find age of person. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Derived  
From date employed and current date 

Multivalued: an employee can have  
more than one skill 

4 Complex 
The  composite  and  multi-valued  attributes  may  be  nested  arbitrarily  to  any  number  of  levels 
although this is rare. 
Or  
The combination of composite and multivalued attribute is also called complex attribute. 
Composite  attribute  between  denoted  by  parentheses  (  )  and  multivalued  attributes  between 
braces { }.    
Example1:  PreviousDegrees  of  a  STUDENT  is  a  composite  multi-valued  attribute  denoted  by 
{PreviousDegrees (College, Year, Degree, Field)}. 
Example2: 

Example3: an attribute that is both multivalued and composite 

Null Attirbute 
 An  entity  may  not  have  any  applicable  value  for  an  attribute.  A  special  value  is  used  in  such 
situation called NULL. 
Example: PhoneNo or Degree attribute of EMPLOYEE entity. 
The unknown category of Null is classified into two cases: 

  The first case arises when it is know that the attribute value exists but is missing. 
  The second case, when it is not known whether the attribute value exist or not. 

Entity Types 
An Entity type defines a collection (or set) of entities that have the same attributes. Each entity in 
the DB is described by a entity name and list of attributes. 
 For example,  the EMPLOYEE entity type/entity name or the PROJECT entity type. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Entity Set 
A collection of all entities of a particular entity type. 
For example: “All people having an account at a bank”.  
ENTITY SET corresponding to the ENTITY TYPE CAR 

Key Attributes 

attribute of the entity type. 
Or 
An entity type has an attribute whose values can be used to identify each entity uniquely is called 
a key attribute. 
 For example: SSN of EMPLOYEE. Airport _code in AIRPORT 
The key Attribute is underline 

SSN 

Age 

EMPLOYEE 

Super Key 

•  The  set  of  attributes  that  can  uniquely  identify  a  tuple  is  known  as  Super  Key.  For 

Example, STUD_NO, (STUD_NO, STUD_NAME),  

It supports NULL values.  

•  A super key is a group of single or multiple keys that identifies rows in a table.  
• 
•  Adding zero or more attributes to the candidate key generates the super key. 
•  A candidate key is a super key but vice versa is not true. 
•  Super Key values may also be NULL. 

Composite Key 
A key attribute may be composite. Such attribute is composite key.  
For  example,  VehicleTagNumber  is  a  key  of  the  CAR  entity  type  with  components  (Number, 
State). 
Example2: Flight table Flight_ID is composite key  

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Candidate key 
An entity type may have more than one key called candidate key.  
Or 
The minimal set of attributes that can uniquely identify a tuple is known as a candidate key 

For example, the CAR entity type may have two keys: 
–VehicleIdentificationNumber (popularly called VIN) and 
–VehicleTagNumber (Number, State), also known as license_plate number. 

Example: The CAR entity type with two key attributes, Registration and VehicleID 
CAR 
Registration(RegistrationNumber, State), VehicleID, Make, Model, Year, (Color) 
car1 
((ABC 123, TEXAS), TK629, Ford Mustang, convertible, 1999, (red, black)) 
car2 
((ABC 123, NEW YORK), WP9872, Nissan 300ZX, 2-door, 2002, (blue)) 
car3 
((VSY 720, TEXAS), TD729, Buick LeSabre, 4-door, 2003, (white, blue)) 

RegNo 

State  

Make  

Reg  

VID 

CAR 

Mode
l  

Year  

Color  

STUD_NO,  as  well  as  STUD_PHONE,  are  candidate  keys  for  relation  STUDENT  but 
STUD_NO can be chosen as the primary key (only one out of many candidate keys).  
STUDENT table -> Student(STUD_NO, SNAME,  
ADDRESS, PHONE) , STUD_NO is a primary key 
Table STUDENT 

STUD_NO         

SNAME          

ADDRESS       

PHONE           

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 10 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
      
       
            
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

1 

2 

3 

Shyam 

Delhi 

123456789 

Rakesh 

Kolkata 

223365796 

Suraj 

Delhi 

175468965 

Value set (or Domain) of attributes 
The domain of an attribute is the set of all possible values from which the attributes can take its 
values. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Value sets are not displayed in ER diagrams.It is specified during creating entity type. 
Example: Season attribute have the possible values are Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter. 
Gender attribute can have Female or Male. 

Mathematically  Definition  of  value  sets  of  attribute:  An  attribute  A  of  entity  type  E  whose 
vale set is V can be defined as a function from E to the power set P(V) of  V; 
A : E→ P(V) 

Initial Conceptual Design of the Company 

DEPARTMENT 
Name,Number,{Location},Manager,ManagerStartDate 

PROJECT 
Name,Number,Location,contrllingDepartment 

EMPLOYEE 
Name(Fname,Initial,Lname),Eno,Sex,Address,Salary,DOB,Department,Supervisor, 
{Workon(Project,Hours)} 

DEPENDENT 
Employee,DependentName,Sex,DOB,Relationship 

Relationship 
An association among entities is called relationship. 
In  ER  diagram  relationship  are  displayed  as  diamond  shape  boxes  which  are  connected  by 
straight line to the rectangular box representing entity types. 

Example: 
                   Relationship 

Relationship Type 

  A  relationship  type  between  two  entity  types  defines  the  set  of  all  association  between 
these  entity  types.  A  relationship  relates  two  or  more  distinct  entities  with  a  specific 
meaning.   

or 
  A relationship type R among n entity types E1,E2, ,……., En defines a set of associations. 
  Example: EMPLOYEE John Smith works on the ProductX PROJECT  
      or EMPLOYEE Franklin Wong manages the Research DEPARTMENT. 
n } 

{ ( e1,…., en ) | e1  

1,……., en 

Example: 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Mathematically,  the  relationship  set  R  is  a  set  of  relationship  instance  ri  ,  where  each  ri  
associates n individual entities ( e1,…., en ) and each entity  ei in  ri is  a member of entity type Ej 
,1<=j<=n. 

Where R be the relationship type. E1,E2,….En be the entity type. e1 through en, are entity set and 
ri is the relationship instances. 

Relationship set 
An instance of a relationship set is a set of relationship. 

Relationship instance 
Each instance of the relationship between members of these entity types is called a relationship 
instance. 
ri = ( e1,…., en ) 

Participate Relationship Type:  
Each of the entity type E1,E2,….En  is said to Participate in the relationship type R. 

Degree of a relationship types 

  The degree of a relationship type is the number of participating entity types. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Both MANAGES and WORKS_ON are binary relationships. 

  Unary Relationship : The number of participating entity type is one in relationship type 

called unary relationship. 

Example1-SUPERVISION 

Examples 2: 

  Binary Relationship: The number of participating entity type is two in relationship type 

called binary relationship. 
Example1- MANAGES ,CONTROLS , WORKSON AND WORKS-FOR . 
Example2:  

  Ternary  Relationship;  The  number  of  participating  entity  type  is  three  in  relationship 

type called ternary relationship. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

 Example-SUPPLIER 

Degree of relationships –   

One entity related to 
another of the same 
entity type 

Entities of two 
different types 
related to each 
other 

Entities of three 
different types related 
to each other 

Role names 
Each entity type that participates in a relationship type plays a particular role in the relationship. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Role names may be added to make the meaning more explicit. 
Ex:  WORKFOR  relationship  type,  Employee  plays  the  role  of  employee  or  worker  and 
DEPARTMENT plays the role of department or employer. 

When to use role name? 
Roles names are not technically necessary in r/n type where all the participating entity types are 
distinct,  since  each  participating  entity  type  name  can  be  used  as  the  role  name.  But  in  some 
cases the same entity type participates more than once in an r/n type in different roles. In such 
cases the role name becomes essential for distinguishing the meaning of each participation. Such 
r/n types are called recursive relationship. 
Recursive relationship 
The same entity participates more than once in a relationship type in different roles. 
Ex: MANAGES relationship type, employee plays the role of subordinate and manager. 

Subordinate 

EMPLOYEE 

Manages 

                                    Manager 

A  recursive  relationship  SUPERVISION  between  EMPLOYEE  in  the  supervisor  role  (1)  and 
EMPLOYEE in the subordinate role (2). 

Attributes of relationship types 
Relationship types can also have attribute similar to those of entity type. 
Example1: To record the number of hours per  week that an  employee  works on a project,  we 
include an attribute hours for the WORKSON r/n type as shown in figure2.2. 
Example2:To  record  the  startdate  of  employee  who  manages  the  department  is  placed  on 
MANAGES r/n type. 

Example3: 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Note: Placing the attribute in relationship  type i.e 1:1, 1:N and M:M . Representing this 
attribute in one of the entity type. 
  The  attributes  of  1:1  or  1:N  relationship(or  r/n)  types  can  be  migrated  to  one  of  the 

participating entity types. 

   1:1 r/n type 

Ex: StartDate attribute for the MANAGES r/n can be an attribute of either    
EMPLOYEE or DEPARTMENT, although conceptually it belongs to MANAGES. This 
is because MANAGES is 1:1 r/n, so every department or employee entity participates in  at 
most one r/n instance. Hence, the value of the Startdate can be determined separately, either 
by the participating department entity or by the participating employee(manager) entity. 

2) 1:N r/n type, a r/n attribute can be migrated only to the entity type on the N-side of the 
r/n. 
Ex:  if workfor r/n also  ha an attribute startdate that  indicates when an  employee started 
working for a department, this attribute can be included as an attribute of employee. This 
is  because  each  employee  works  for  only  one  department,  and  hence  participates  in  at 
most one r/n instance in workfor. 

Placing the attribute is determined by schema designer. 

3)  M:M r/n types, some attributes any be determined by the combination of participating 
entities in a r/n instance, not by any single entity. Such attributes must be specified as r/n 
attributes. 
EX: Hours attribute of the M:M WORKON r/n type, the number of hours the employee 
works  on  project  is  determined  by  an  (separate/new    relation  as)  employee_project 
combination and not separately by either entity. 

Constraints on Relationships Types (constraints means restriction or limitation) 
Relationship  types  have  certain  constraints  that  limit  the  possible  combination  of  entities  that 
may participate in the corresponding relationship set. 
Example: a company has a rule that each employee must work for exactly one department. 

There two main types of relationship constraints  

  Cardinality ratio (Maximum Cardinality constraint ) 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

  Participation  (also  called  Minimum  Cardinality  or  participation  constraint  or 

existence dependency constraints) 

Constraints ratio for binary Relationship Types 
(Also known as ratio constraints) 
 Cardinality  ratio  (Maximum  Cardinality)  for  a  binary  relationship  specifies  the  maximum 
number of relationship instances that an entity can participate in. 
Or 
Cardinality  Constraints  -  the  number  of  instances  of  one  entity  that  can  or  must  be  associated 
with each instance of another entity. 
 
 
 
 

   One-to-one (1:1) 
   One-to-many (1:N) 
   Many-to-one (N:1) 
   Many-to-many (M:N) 

  One – to – One 

  Each entity in the relationship will have exactly one related entity. 

Example2:       

 Example3: 

  One – to – Many 

  An  entity  on  one  side  of  the  relationship  can  have  many  related  entities,  but  an 

entity on the other side will have a maximum of one related entity. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

 

  Many – to – Many 

  Entities  on  both  sides  of  the  relationship  can  have  many  related  entities  on  the 

other side. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Participation constraint 
It specifies whether the existence of an entity depends on its being related to another entity the 
relationship types. 
This  constraint  specifies  the  minimum  number  of  relationship  instances  that  each  entity  can 
participate in. This type is called Minimum Cardinality constraint. 

There are two types of Participation constraint 
1.Total Participation constraint (or existence dependency): 
It means that every entity participates in „the total set “of the relationship types 
Represented in double line in ER diagram. 
Ex: WORKS_IN thick line representing total participation 

2.Partial Participation constraint: 
It means that some or “part of the set of” entity participates in a relationship types. Represented 
in single line in ER diagram. 
Ex: MANAGES thin line representing partial participation. 

Structural constraints 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The  combination  of  cardinality  ratio  and  participation  constraints  taken  together  is  called  a 
Structural constraints of a r/n type. 

DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

ss
n 

Cardinality ration and Participation Constraints (both total and partial) 

name 

lot 

did 

dname 

budget 

Employee 

1 

Department 

1 

1 

startdate 

Manages 

N 

WORKS_FOR 

Startdate
e 

Regular entity or Strong entities or identifying or owner entity type or parent entity type or 
dominant entity type 
Entity that has its own key attribute. 
It exist independently of other types of entities 
Eg: Emloyee, Student etc 

KEY ATTRIBUTE 

Weak Entity Types or child entity type or subordinate entity type 

  An entity that depends on other entity for its existence and doesn‟t have a key attribute of 

its own. 

Or 
Weak entity type dependent on a strong entity type and cannot exist on its own. 
Does not have a unique identifier. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

  A  weak  entity  must  participate  in  an  identifying  relationship  type  with  an  owner  or 

identifying entity type. 

  Entities are identified by the combination of: 
  A partial key of the weak entity type. 
  The particular entity they are related to in the identifying entity type. 

Example:  
 Suppose that a DEPENDENT entity is identified by the dependent‟s first name and birthdates, 
and the specific EMPLOYEE that the dependent  is  related to.   DEPENDENT is  a weak entity 
type  with  EMPLOYEE  as  its  identifying  entity  type  via  the  identifying  relationship  type 
DEPENDENT_OF strong and weak entities. 

Strong Entity 

Weak Entity 

 Identifying relationship 
Identifying relationship links strong entities to weak entities. 

Why weak entity type is always total participation constraint? 
Because weak entity type cannot be identified without an owner entity type. 

Partial key or discriminator: 
A weak entity type has partial key, which is the set of attributes that can uniquely identify weak 
entity type that are related to the same owner entity type. 

Note:  

  a composite attribute of all the weak entity attributes will be the partial key. 
  weak  entity  type  can  have  more  than  one  identifying  entity  type  and  an  identifying 

relationship type . 

  weak entity type can be complex attribute (composite, multivalued) sometimes. 

PROPER NAMING OF SCHEMA CONSTRUCTS 

  Singular names for entity types. 
  Entity type and r/n type names are in uppercase letter. 
  Attributes names are capitalized. 
  Role name are in lower case letter. 
  ER diagram of the schema readable from left to right and from top to bottom. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

 

In general practice, nouns tend to indicates names of entity types and the verbs ten d to 
indicate  names  of  relationship  types.  Attributes  names  generally  from  additional  nouns 
that describe the nouns corresponding to entity types. 

Ex: DEPENDENTS_OF r/n types reads from bottom-to-top. To change this to read from top to 
bottom,  rename  the  r/n  type  to  HAS-DEPENDENTs.    These  read  as  follows  an  employee 
entity(top entity type) has-dependents( r/n type) of type dependent (bottom entity type). 

Notations for ER diagram 

A graphical represents the entities, attributes and relationship. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 23 

 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 24 

 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Alternative (min, max) notation for relationship structural constraints: 
   One  alternative  ER  notation  for  specifying  structural  constraints  on  r/n.  This  involves 
associating a pair of integer numbers (min,max) with each participation of an entity type E in 
a r/n type R, where 0<=min<=max and max>=1. 

   The numbers mean that for each entity e in E, e must participate in at least min and at most 

max r/n instances in R at any point in time. 

   Min=0 implies partial participation, whereas min>0 implies total participation. 
   Default (no constraint): min=0, max=n. 
-  Must have min<max, min>0, max>1. 
-  Derived from the mini-world constraints. 

Examples: 
(a) A department has exactly one  manager and an employee can manage at most one  department. 
-  Specify (1,1) for participation of EMPLOYEE in MANAGES 
-  Specify (0,1) for participation of EMPLOYEE in MANAGES 

(b)  An  employee  can  work  for  exactly  one    department  but  a  department  can  have  any  number  of  
employees. 
-  Specify (1,1) for participation of EMPLOYEE in WORKS_FOR 
-  Specify (0,n) for participation of DEPARTMENT in WORKS_FOR 

ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm 

Step 1: Mapping of Regular Entity Types 
Step 2: Mapping of Weak Entity Types 
Step 3: Mapping of Binary 1:1 Relation Types 
Step 4: Mapping of Binary 1:N Relationship Types. 
Step 5: Mapping of Binary M:N Relationship Types. 
Step 6: Mapping of Multivalued attributes. 
Step 7: Mapping of N-ary Relationship Types. 

ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm 

•  Step 1: Mapping of Regular Entity Types. 

–  For each regular (strong) entity type E in the ER schema, create a     relation R 

that includes all the simple attributes of E. 

–  Choose one of the key attributes of E as the primary key for R. If the chosen key 
of E is composite, the set of simple attributes that form it will together form the 
primary key of R. 

Example:  We create the  relations EMPLOYEE,  DEPARTMENT, and PROJECT in the 
relational  schema  corresponding  to  the  regular  entities  in  the  ER  diagram.  SSN,  DNUMBER, 
and  PNUMBER  are  the  primary  keys  for  the  relations  EMPLOYEE,  DEPARTMENT,  and 
PROJECT as shown. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Step 2: Mapping of Weak Entity Types 

–  For each weak entity type W in the ER schema with owner entity type E, create a 
relation  R and include all simple attributes (or simple components  of composite 
attributes) of W as attributes of R. 
In addition, include as foreign key attributes of R the primary key attribute(s) of 
the relation(s) that correspond to the owner entity type(s). 

– 

–  The  primary  key  of  R  is  the  combination  of  the  primary  key(s)  of  the  owner(s) 

and the partial key of the weak entity type W, if any. 

         Example:  Create  the  relation  DEPENDENT  in  this  step  to  correspond  to  the  weak  entity 
type DEPENDENT. Include the primary key SSN of the EMPLOYEE relation as a foreign key 
attribute of DEPENDENT (renamed to ESSN).  
    The  primary  key  of 
DEPENDENT_NAME} because DEPENDENT_NAME is the partial key of DEPENDENT.  

the  combination  {ESSN, 

the  DEPENDENT 

relation 

is 

Step 3: Mapping of Binary 1:1 Relation Types 
For  each  binary  1:1  relationship  type  R  in  the  ER  schema,  identify  the  relations  S  and  T  that 
correspond to the entity types participating in R. There are three possible approaches: 

      (1) Foreign Key approach: Choose one of the relations-S, say-and include a foreign key in S 
the primary key of T. It is better to choose an entity type with total participation in R in the role 
of S.  
      Example:  1:1  relation  MANAGES  is  mapped  by  choosing  the  participating  entity  type 
DEPARTMENT  to  serve  in  the  role  of  S,  because  its  participation  in  the  MANAGES 
relationship type is total. 

     (2)  Merged  relation  option:  An  alternate  mapping  of  a  1:1  relationship  type  is  possible  by 
merging the two entity types and the relationship into a single relation. This may be appropriate 
when both participations are total. 

     (3)  Cross-reference  or  relationship  relation  option:  The  third  alternative  is  to  set  up  a  third 
relation  R  for  the  purpose  of  cross-referencing  the  primary  keys  of  the  two  relations  S  and  T 
representing the entity types.  

Step 4: Mapping of Binary 1:N Relationship Types. 

•  For each regular binary 1:N relationship type R, identify the relation S that represent the 

participating entity type at the N-side of the relationship type.  

– 

– 

Include as  foreign key in S the primary key of the relation  T that represents  the 
other entity type participating in R.  
Include any simple attributes of the 1:N relation type as attributes of S.  

     Example:  1:N  relationship  types  WORKS_FOR,  CONTROLS,  and  SUPERVISION  in  the 
figure.  For  WORKS_FOR  we  include  the  primary  key  DNUMBER  of  the  DEPARTMENT 
relation as foreign key in the EMPLOYEE relation and call it DNO.  

Step 5: Mapping of Binary M:N Relationship Types. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

•  For each regular binary M:N relationship type R, create a new relation S to represent R.  

– 

Include  as  foreign  key  attributes  in  S  the  primary  keys  of  the  relations  that 
represent  the  participating  entity  types;  their  combination  will  form  the  primary 
key of S.  

–  Also  include  any  simple  attributes  of  the  M:N  relationship  type  (or  simple 

components of composite attributes) as attributes of S. 

     Example:  The  M:N  relationship  type  WORKS_ON  from  the  ER    diagram  is  mapped  by 
creating  a  relation  WORKS_ON  in  the  relational  database  schema.  The  primary  keys  of  the 
PROJECT and EMPLOYEE relations are included as foreign keys in WORKS_ON and renamed 
PNO and ESSN, respectively.  
    Attribute HOURS in WORKS_ON represents the HOURS attribute of the  relation type. The 
primary key of the WORKS_ON relation is the combination of the foreign key attributes {ESSN, 
PNO}.   

Step 6: Mapping of Multivalued attributes 

•  For each multivalued attribute A, create a new relation R. This relation R will include an 
attribute corresponding to A, plus the primary key attribute K-as a foreign key in R-of the 
relation that represents the entity type of relationship type that has A as an attribute.  

–  The primary key of R is the combination of A and K. If the multivalued attribute 

is composite, we include its simple components.  

     Example:  The  relation  DEPT_LOCATIONS  is  created.  The  attribute  DLOCATION 
represents  the  multivalued  attribute  LOCATIONS  of  DEPARTMENT,  while  DNUMBER-as 
foreign key-represents the primary key of the DEPARTMENT relation. The primary key of R is 
the combination of {DNUMBER, DLOCATION}. 

Step 7: Mapping of N-ary Relationship Types 

•  For each n-ary relationship type R, where n>2, create a new relationship S to represent R. 
Include  as  foreign  key  attributes  in  S  the  primary  keys  of  the  relations  that 
represent the participating entity types.  

– 

–  Also  include  any  simple  attributes  of  the  n-ary  relationship  type  (or  simple 

components of composite attributes) as attributes of S.  

     Example: The relationship type SUPPY in the ER below. This can be mapped to the relation 
SUPPLY  shown  in  the  relational  schema,  whose  primary  key  is  the  combination  of  the  three 
foreign keys {SNAME, PARTNO, PROJNAME} 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 27 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

FIGURE 4.11 
Ternary relationship types. (a) The SUPPLY relationship.  

FIGURE 7.3 
Mapping the n-ary relationship type SUPPLY from Figure 4.11a. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Figure:.ER  diagram  with  structural  constraints  and  all  role  names  for  the  company  DB 
schema. 

Specialization and Generalization: 
Generalization: 

  Generalization is the reverse of the specialization process. 
  Several classes with common features are generalized into a superclass;  

  original classes become its subclasses 

  Example1: CAR, TRUCK generalized into VEHICLE;  

  both CAR, TRUCK become subclasses of the superclass VEHICLE. 
  We can view {CAR, TRUCK} as a specialization of VEHICLE  
  Alternatively, we can view VEHICLE as a generalization of CAR and 

TRUCK. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

For  example:  pigeon,  house  sparrow,  crow  and  dove  can  all  be  generalized  as 

Birds. 

Specialization: 
Specialization is the process of defining a set of subclasses of a superclass. 
The  set  of  subclasses  is  based  upon  some  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the 
entities in the superclass. 
Or  
Specialization  is  the  opposite  of  generalization.  In  specialization,  a  group  of 
entities is divided into sub-groups based on their characteristics.  
Take a group „Person‟ for example. A person has name, date of birth, gender, etc. 
These properties are common in all persons, human beings.  
But in a company, persons can be identified as employee, employer, customer, or 
vendor, based on what role they play in the company. 

Example1:  {SECRETARY,  ENGINEER,  TECHNICIAN}  is  a  specialization  of 
EMPLOYEE  based  upon  job  type.  May  have  several  specializations  of  the  same 
superclass. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DBMS[22AI33]  2023 

Example2:  Another 
{SALARIED_EMPLOYEE, HOURLY_EMPLOYEE}. 

specialization  of  EMPLOYEE  based  on  method  of  pay 

is 

Example3:  Similarly, in a school database, persons can be specialized as teacher, 
student, or a staff, based on what role they play in school as entities. 

Dept of AI&ML,DSCE,Bangalore 

Page 31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
